day2_afternoon/README.md, before:

# Day 2 Afternoon
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

## High-throughput BLAST and pan-genome analysis

This morning we learned how to perform basic genome annotation and comparison using Prokka and ACT. Now we will up the ante and do some more sophisticated comparative genomics analyses! 
First, we will create custom BLAST databases to identify specific antibiotic resistance genes of interest in a set of genomes. 
Second, we will use the large-scale BLAST-based tool LS-BSR to identify the complete antibiotic resistome in our genomes. 
Third, we will move beyond antibiotic resistance, and look at the complete set of protein coding genes in our input genomes. 
Finally, we will go back to ACT to understand the sorts of genomic rearrangements underlying observed variation in gene content.  

For these exercises we will be looking at four closely related Acinetobacter baumannii strains. However, despite being closely related, these genomes have major differences in gene content, as A. baumannii has a notoriously flexible genome! In fact, in large part due to its genomic flexibility, A. baumannii has transitioned from a harmless environmental contaminant to a pan-resistant super-bug in a matter of a few decades. If you are interested in learning more, check out this nature [review](http://www.nature.com/nrmicro/journal/v5/n12/abs/nrmicro1789.html) or [this](http://www.pnas.org/content/108/33/13758.abstract) paper, I published a few years back analyzing the very same genomes you are working with.

Execute the following command to copy files for this afternoon’s exercises to your scratch directory:

```  
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username
cp -r /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/shared/data/day2_after/ ./
```

## Determine which genomes contain beta-lactamase genes
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

Before comparing full genomic content, lets start by looking for the presence of particular genes of interest. A. baumannii harbors an arsenal of resistance genes, and it would be interesting to know how particular resistance families vary among our 4 genomes. To accomplish this we will use the antibiotic resistance database ([ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/)). In particular, we are going to extract a set of genes from ARDB that we are interested in probing our genomes for, and create a custom BLAST database to compare against. 

**Get beta-lactamase genes from [ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/) database**

>i. Run the custom perl script filter_fasta_file.pl to extract genes annotated as beta-lactamases from the full ARDB fasta file. 

The script takes as input: 

1) the ARDB database (resisGenes.pfasta), 

2) a file containing terms to search the database for (fasta_file_keys) and 

3) an output file to contain the subset of sequences that match the text your searching for (ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta).

```
module load BioPerl
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
perl filter_fasta_file.pl resisGenes.pfasta fasta_file_keys ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta
```

>ii. Build BLAST database from fasta file

Run formatdb on the file of beta-lactamases to create a BLAST database. 
formatdb takes as input: 

1) a fasta file of protein or nucleotide sequences (ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta) and 

2) a flag indicating whether to construct a protein or nucleotide database (in this case protein/ -p T).

```
formatdb -i ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta -p T
```

>iii. BLAST A. baumannii proteins against our custom beta-lactamase database

Run BLAST! 

The input parameters are: 

1) the type of blast to use (-p blastp),

2) query sequences (-i Abau_all.pfasta), 

3) the database to search against (-d ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta),

4) the name of a file to store your results (-o bl_blastp_results), 

5) output format (-m 8), 

6) e-value cutoff (-e 1e-20), 

7) number of database sequences to return (-v 1) and 

8) number of database sequences to show alignment for (-b 1).

```
blastall -p blastp -i Abau_all.pfasta -d ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta -o bl_blastp_results -m 8 -e 1e-20 -v 1 -b 1
```

Use less to look at bl_blastp_results.
Experiment with the –m parameter, which controls different output formats that BLAST can produce. 


>iv. Repeat steps i-iii for a different resistance gene class

Use nano to change fasta_file_keys to contain phrase you’d like to search for (e.g. acetyltransferase, carbapenemase)

Run filter_fasta_file.pl to extract genes annotated with your resistance of interest (ROI) from the full ARDB fasta file

```
perl filter_fasta_file.pl resisGenes.pfasta fasta_file_keys ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta
```

Create new BLAST database with formatdb

```
formatdb -i ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta -p T
```

**BLAST!**


```
blastall -p blastp -i Abau_all.pfasta -d ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta -o bl_blastp_results -m 8 -e 1e-20 -v 1 -b 1
```

## Identification of antibiotic resistance genes with [LS-BSR](https://github.com/jasonsahl/LS-BSR) and the [ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/) database
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

Next, instead of looking at resistance classes one at a time, lets look at them all in one shot! To do this we will use [LS-BSR](https://peerj.com/articles/332/), which essentially is just a wrapper for doing the same sort of BLASTing we just did in the previous step. BSR stands for BLAST Score Ratio, which refers to what the output is. In particular, for each query gene LS-BSR returns the ratio between: 1) the BLAST score of best hit in target genome and 2) BLAST score of query gene against itself. So, the output is a query by target genome matrix, where the values are between 0 and 1, and indicate the strength of a given queries BLAST hit in the target genome. 


>i. Create a non-redundant list of resistance genes

There is a lot of redundancy in the ARDB (e.g. lots of closely related genes), which would make the output difficult to sort through. Here, we use usearch to select representatives from the database and create a non-redundant gene set! 

We are running usearch with the following parameters: 
1) the clustering algorithm (-cluster_fast), 
2) the files of sequences you want to cluster (resisGenes.pep), 
3) the minimum sequence identity to be included in an existing cluster (-id 0.8), 
4) an output fasta file with reperesentatives (centroids) of each sequence cluster (-centroids resisGenes_nr.pep) and 
5) an output file describing the results of the clustering (-uc resisGenes.uc).

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
usearch -cluster_fast resisGenes.pep -id 0.8 -centroids resisGenes_nr.pep -uc resisGenes.uc
```

>ii. Run LS-BSR

LS-BSR is pretty intensive, so we want to get an interactive node to run this

```
qsub -I -V -l nodes=1:ppn=1,mem=4000mb,walltime=00:01:00:00 -q fluxod -l qos=flux -A micro612w16_fluxod
```

Change your directory to day2_after and load the required modules for LS-BSR

```
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day1_after/

module load med 
module load sph 
module load lsa 
module load usearch 
module load python/2.7.3 
module load biopython 
module load ls-bsr 
module load prodigal
```

Run LS-BSR (it will take a few minutes)! 

The input parameters are: a directory with your genomes (-d Abau_genomes) and a fasta file of query genes (-g resisGenes_nr.pep)

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after 
python /home/software/rhel6/med/python-libs/ls-bsr/1.0/LS-BSR-master/ls_bsr.py -d Abau_genomes/ -g resisGenes_nr.pep
```

>iii. Download LS-BSR output matrix to your own computer for analysis in R

Use sftp to get LS-BSR output onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is) 
mkdir LS-BSR_resistome 
cd LS-BSR_resistome 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after 
get bsr_matrix_values.txt
```

Fire up RStudio and read the matrix:

```
bsr_mat = read.table('bsr_matrix_values.txt', sep = "\t", row.names = 1, header = TRUE, quote = "")
```

Use head, str, dim, etc. to explore the matrix you read in

iv. Make a heatmap of all the LS-BSR results

Install and load the R library "heatmap3"

Make a heatmap of the complete LS-BSR matrix. Check out the help file to see what the input parameters do, and behold the plethora of other options to customize your heatmaps!

```
heatmap3(bsr_mat, , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```


>v. Subset LS-BSR data to only include genes present in at least one genome 

From the previous step you should have discerned that full LS-BSR matrix is too large to get a useful visualization, so we need to subset it. 
Lets first subset the matrix to focus only on genes present in at least one of our genomes. 
Values in the LS-BSR matrix are between 0 and 1, and represent the sequence identity to the query gene. 
We will arbitrarily say that if a protein have a BLAST score ratio of less then 0.5, then its absent.

```
bsr_mat_subset = bsr_mat[rowSums(bsr_mat > 0.5) > 0,]
```

Make a heatmap of your subset (much better!)

```
heatmap3(bsr_mat_subset, , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

>vi. Determine the total number of resistance genes present in each genome

We use colSums to count the number of genes with greater than 50% identity to the query

```
colSums(bsr_mat > 0.5)
```

How does the total number of genes vary by altering the percent identity threshold?

>vii. Determine the total number of bla genes in each genome

Next, we will use grepl to pull out genes of interest

```
bla_bsr_mat = bsr_mat[grepl('beta-lactamase', row.names(bsr_mat)) ,]
```

Print out to screen and make a heatmap to explore

>viii. Subset the full matrix to look at genes that are present in only one genome

Get genes present in only one genome

```
unique_bsr_mat = bsr_mat[rowSums(bsr_mat > .5) == 1,]
```

Print out to screen and make a heatmap to explore

## Perform pan-genome analysis with LS-BSR
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

As a final BLASTing exercise we will use LS-BSR to explore the pan-genome of our A. baumannii. The pan-genome is just a fancy term for the full complement of genes in a set of genomes. 
The way LS-BSR does this is by: 
1) applying prodigal to identify protein coding genes in input genomes, 
2) applying usearch to create non-redundant set of genes and 
3) BLASTing the set of non-redundant genes against the genomes.

>i. Get pan-genome matrix and transfer annotation

Make sure you are on an interactive node, as this will be even more computationally intensive!

```
qsub -I -V -l nodes=1:ppn=1,mem=4000mb,walltime=1:00:00:00 -q fluxod -l qos=flux -A micro612w16_fluxod
```

Change your directory to day2_after

```
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after/
```


Run LS-BSR! The –u parameter is just a path to where usearch lives on flux.

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after

python /home/software/rhel6/med/python-libs/ls-bsr/1.0/LS-BSR-master/ls_bsr.py -d ../Abau_genomes/ -u /home/software/rhel6/sph/usearch/7.0.1001/bin/usearch7.0.1001_i86linux32
```

Run the custom perl script transfer_annotations.pl to add annotations to your BSR matrix. The output of this script will be bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt

```
perl transfer_annotations.pl Abau_ECII_PC.fasta Abau_ECII_PC.NR.annot bsr_matrix_values.txt consensus.fasta
```

>ii. Read matrix into R and create heatmap

Use sftp to get LS-BSR output onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is) 
mkdir LS-BSR_pan_genome 
cd LS-BSR_pan_genome 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after get bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt
```

Fire up RStudio and read the matrix in

```
bsr_mat_PG = read.table('bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt', sep = "\t", row.names = 1, header = TRUE, quote = "")
```

Use head, str, dim, etc. to explore the matrix you read in
Make a heatmap for the full matrix

```
heatmap3(as.matrix(bsr_mat_PG), , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

Make a heatmap for variable genes (present in at least one, but not all of the genomes

```
bsr_mat_PG_subset = bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) > 0 & rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) < 4 ,] heatmap3(as.matrix(bsr_mat_PG_subset), , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

>iii. Which genomes are most closely related based upon shared gene content?

We will use the outer function to determine the number of genes shared by each pair of genomes. 
Here we are arbitrarily deciding that a gene is present if the BSR is greater than 0.4. 
Look at the help page for outer to gain additional insight into how this is working.

```
outer(1:4,1:4, FUN = Vectorize(function(x,y){sum(bsr_mat_PG_subset[,x] > 0.4 & bsr_mat_PG_subset[,y] > 0.4)}))
```

>iv. What is the size of the core genome?

Lets first get an overview of how many genes are present in different numbers of genomes (0, 1, 2, 3 or 4) by plotting a histogram. Here, we combine hist with rowSums to accomplish this.

```
hist(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4))
```

Next, lets figure out how big the core genome is (e.g. how many genes are common to all of our genomes)?

```
sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4)
```

>v. What is the size of the accessory genome?

Lets use a similar approach to determine the size of the accessory genome (e.g. those genes present in only a subset of our genomes).

```
sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) < 4 & rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) > 0)
```

>vi. What types of genes are unique to a given genome?

So far we have quantified the core and accessory genome, now lets see if we can get an idea of what types of genes are core vs. accessory. Lets start by looking at those genes present in only a single genome. What do you notice about these genes?

```
row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1,])
```

vii. What is the number of hypothetical genes in core vs. accessory genome?

Looking at unqiue genes we see that many are annotated as “hypothetical”, indicating that the sequence looks like a gene, but has no detectable homology with a functionally characterized gene. Determine the fraction of “hypothetical” genes in unique vs. core. Why does this make sense?

```
sum(grepl("hypothetical" , row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1,]))) / sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1)

sum(grepl("hypothetical" , row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4,]))) / sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4)
```

## Perform genome comparisons with [ACT](http://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/tools/artemis-comparison-tool-act)
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

In the previous exercises we were focusing on gene content, but losing the context of the structural variation underlying gene content variation (e.g. large insertions and deletions). 
Here we will use ACT to compare two of our genomes (note that you can use ACT to compare more than two genomes if desired). 

i. Create ACT alignment file with BLAST

As we saw this morning, to compare genomes in ACT we need to use BLAST to create the alignments. We will do this on flux.

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
blastall -p blastn -i ../Abau_genomes/AbauA_genome.fasta -d ../Abau_BLAST_DB/ACICU_genome.fasta -m 8 -e 1e-20 -o AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast
```

>ii. Read in genomes, alignments and annotation files

Use sftp to get ACT files onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is)
mkdir Abau_ACT cd Abau_ACT 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu 
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after get Abau_genomes/AbauA_genome.fasta get Abau_genomes/ACICU_genome.fasta 
get AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast 
get Abau_ACT_files/AbauA_genome_gene.gff 
get Abau_ACT_files/ACICU_genome_gene.gff
```

>iii. Explore genome comparison and features of ACT

Read in genomes and alignment into ACT

```
Go to File -> open 
Sequence file 1  = ACICU_genome.fasta 
Comparison file 1  = AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast
Sequence file 2  = AbauA_genome.fasta
```

Before we use annotation present in genbank files. Here we will use ACT specific annotation files so we get some prettier display (resistance genes = red, transposable elements = bright green)  

```
Go to File -> ACICU_genome.fasta -> Read an entry file = ACICU_genome_gene.gff

Go to File -> AbauA_genome.fasta -> Read an entry file = AbauA_genome_gene.gff
```

Play around in ACT to gain some insight into the sorts of genes present in large insertion/deletion regions. 
See if you can find: 
1) differences in phage content, 
2) membrane biosynthetic gene cluster variation and 
3) antibiotic resistance island variation.

Commit message:

fixing path to Abu_genomes and note about dependency modules

day2_afternoon/README.md, after:

# Day 2 Afternoon
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

## High-throughput BLAST and pan-genome analysis

This morning we learned how to perform basic genome annotation and comparison using Prokka and ACT. Now we will up the ante and do some more sophisticated comparative genomics analyses! 
First, we will create custom BLAST databases to identify specific antibiotic resistance genes of interest in a set of genomes. 
Second, we will use the large-scale BLAST-based tool LS-BSR to identify the complete antibiotic resistome in our genomes. 
Third, we will move beyond antibiotic resistance, and look at the complete set of protein coding genes in our input genomes. 
Finally, we will go back to ACT to understand the sorts of genomic rearrangements underlying observed variation in gene content.  

For these exercises we will be looking at four closely related Acinetobacter baumannii strains. However, despite being closely related, these genomes have major differences in gene content, as A. baumannii has a notoriously flexible genome! In fact, in large part due to its genomic flexibility, A. baumannii has transitioned from a harmless environmental contaminant to a pan-resistant super-bug in a matter of a few decades. If you are interested in learning more, check out this nature [review](http://www.nature.com/nrmicro/journal/v5/n12/abs/nrmicro1789.html) or [this](http://www.pnas.org/content/108/33/13758.abstract) paper, I published a few years back analyzing the very same genomes you are working with.

Execute the following command to copy files for this afternoon’s exercises to your scratch directory:

```  
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username
cp -r /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/shared/data/day2_after/ ./
```

## Determine which genomes contain beta-lactamase genes
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

Before comparing full genomic content, lets start by looking for the presence of particular genes of interest. A. baumannii harbors an arsenal of resistance genes, and it would be interesting to know how particular resistance families vary among our 4 genomes. To accomplish this we will use the antibiotic resistance database ([ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/)). In particular, we are going to extract a set of genes from ARDB that we are interested in probing our genomes for, and create a custom BLAST database to compare against. 

**Get beta-lactamase genes from [ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/) database**

>i. Run the custom perl script filter_fasta_file.pl to extract genes annotated as beta-lactamases from the full ARDB fasta file. 

The script takes as input: 

1) the ARDB database (resisGenes.pfasta), 

2) a file containing terms to search the database for (fasta_file_keys) and 

3) an output file to contain the subset of sequences that match the text your searching for (ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta).

```
module load BioPerl
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
perl filter_fasta_file.pl resisGenes.pfasta fasta_file_keys ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta
```

>ii. Build BLAST database from fasta file

Run formatdb on the file of beta-lactamases to create a BLAST database. 
formatdb takes as input: 

1) a fasta file of protein or nucleotide sequences (ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta) and 

2) a flag indicating whether to construct a protein or nucleotide database (in this case protein/ -p T).

```
formatdb -i ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta -p T
```

>iii. BLAST A. baumannii proteins against our custom beta-lactamase database

Run BLAST! 

The input parameters are: 

1) the type of blast to use (-p blastp),

2) query sequences (-i Abau_all.pfasta), 

3) the database to search against (-d ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta),

4) the name of a file to store your results (-o bl_blastp_results), 

5) output format (-m 8), 

6) e-value cutoff (-e 1e-20), 

7) number of database sequences to return (-v 1) and 

8) number of database sequences to show alignment for (-b 1).

```
blastall -p blastp -i Abau_all.pfasta -d ardb_beta_lactam_genes.pfasta -o bl_blastp_results -m 8 -e 1e-20 -v 1 -b 1
```

Use less to look at bl_blastp_results.
Experiment with the –m parameter, which controls different output formats that BLAST can produce. 


>iv. Repeat steps i-iii for a different resistance gene class

Use nano to change fasta_file_keys to contain phrase you’d like to search for (e.g. acetyltransferase, carbapenemase)

Run filter_fasta_file.pl to extract genes annotated with your resistance of interest (ROI) from the full ARDB fasta file

```
perl filter_fasta_file.pl resisGenes.pfasta fasta_file_keys ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta
```

Create new BLAST database with formatdb

```
formatdb -i ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta -p T
```

**BLAST!**


```
blastall -p blastp -i Abau_all.pfasta -d ardb_ROI_genes.pfasta -o bl_blastp_results -m 8 -e 1e-20 -v 1 -b 1
```

## Identification of antibiotic resistance genes with [LS-BSR](https://github.com/jasonsahl/LS-BSR) and the [ARDB](http://ardb.cbcb.umd.edu/) database
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

Next, instead of looking at resistance classes one at a time, lets look at them all in one shot! To do this we will use [LS-BSR](https://peerj.com/articles/332/), which essentially is just a wrapper for doing the same sort of BLASTing we just did in the previous step. BSR stands for BLAST Score Ratio, which refers to what the output is. In particular, for each query gene LS-BSR returns the ratio between: 1) the BLAST score of best hit in target genome and 2) BLAST score of query gene against itself. So, the output is a query by target genome matrix, where the values are between 0 and 1, and indicate the strength of a given queries BLAST hit in the target genome. 


>i. Create a non-redundant list of resistance genes

There is a lot of redundancy in the ARDB (e.g. lots of closely related genes), which would make the output difficult to sort through. Here, we use usearch to select representatives from the database and create a non-redundant gene set! 

We are running usearch with the following parameters: 
1) the clustering algorithm (-cluster_fast), 
2) the files of sequences you want to cluster (resisGenes.pep), 
3) the minimum sequence identity to be included in an existing cluster (-id 0.8), 
4) an output fasta file with reperesentatives (centroids) of each sequence cluster (-centroids resisGenes_nr.pep) and 
5) an output file describing the results of the clustering (-uc resisGenes.uc).

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
usearch -cluster_fast resisGenes.pep -id 0.8 -centroids resisGenes_nr.pep -uc resisGenes.uc
```

>ii. Run LS-BSR

LS-BSR is pretty intensive, so we want to get an interactive node to run this

```
qsub -I -V -l nodes=1:ppn=1,mem=4000mb,walltime=00:01:00:00 -q fluxod -l qos=flux -A micro612w16_fluxod
```

Change your directory to day2_after and load the required modules for LS-BSR

```
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day1_after/

module load med 
module load sph 
module load lsa 
module load usearch 
module load python/2.7.3 
module load biopython 
module load ls-bsr 
module load prodigal
```

Run LS-BSR (it will take a few minutes)! 

The input parameters are: a directory with your genomes (-d Abau_genomes) and a fasta file of query genes (-g resisGenes_nr.pep)

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after 
python /home/software/rhel6/med/python-libs/ls-bsr/1.0/LS-BSR-master/ls_bsr.py -d Abau_genomes/ -g resisGenes_nr.pep
```

>iii. Download LS-BSR output matrix to your own computer for analysis in R

Use sftp to get LS-BSR output onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is) 
mkdir LS-BSR_resistome 
cd LS-BSR_resistome 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after 
get bsr_matrix_values.txt
```

Fire up RStudio and read the matrix:

```
bsr_mat = read.table('bsr_matrix_values.txt', sep = "\t", row.names = 1, header = TRUE, quote = "")
```

Use head, str, dim, etc. to explore the matrix you read in

iv. Make a heatmap of all the LS-BSR results

Install and load the R library "heatmap3"

Make a heatmap of the complete LS-BSR matrix. Check out the help file to see what the input parameters do, and behold the plethora of other options to customize your heatmaps!

```
heatmap3(bsr_mat, , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```


>v. Subset LS-BSR data to only include genes present in at least one genome 

From the previous step you should have discerned that full LS-BSR matrix is too large to get a useful visualization, so we need to subset it. 
Lets first subset the matrix to focus only on genes present in at least one of our genomes. 
Values in the LS-BSR matrix are between 0 and 1, and represent the sequence identity to the query gene. 
We will arbitrarily say that if a protein have a BLAST score ratio of less then 0.5, then its absent.

```
bsr_mat_subset = bsr_mat[rowSums(bsr_mat > 0.5) > 0,]
```

Make a heatmap of your subset (much better!)

```
heatmap3(bsr_mat_subset, , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

>vi. Determine the total number of resistance genes present in each genome

We use colSums to count the number of genes with greater than 50% identity to the query

```
colSums(bsr_mat > 0.5)
```

How does the total number of genes vary by altering the percent identity threshold?

>vii. Determine the total number of bla genes in each genome

Next, we will use grepl to pull out genes of interest

```
bla_bsr_mat = bsr_mat[grepl('beta-lactamase', row.names(bsr_mat)) ,]
```

Print out to screen and make a heatmap to explore

>viii. Subset the full matrix to look at genes that are present in only one genome

Get genes present in only one genome

```
unique_bsr_mat = bsr_mat[rowSums(bsr_mat > .5) == 1,]
```

Print out to screen and make a heatmap to explore

## Perform pan-genome analysis with LS-BSR
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

As a final BLASTing exercise we will use LS-BSR to explore the pan-genome of our A. baumannii. The pan-genome is just a fancy term for the full complement of genes in a set of genomes. 
The way LS-BSR does this is by: 
1) applying prodigal to identify protein coding genes in input genomes, 
2) applying usearch to create non-redundant set of genes and 
3) BLASTing the set of non-redundant genes against the genomes.

>i. Get pan-genome matrix and transfer annotation

Make sure you are on an interactive node, as this will be even more computationally intensive!

```
qsub -I -V -l nodes=1:ppn=1,mem=4000mb,walltime=1:00:00:00 -q fluxod -l qos=flux -A micro612w16_fluxod
```

Change your directory to day2_after

```
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after/
```


Run LS-BSR! The –u parameter is just a path to where usearch lives on flux.
If you started a new interactive job since you ran LS-BSR, you will need to re-load the required modules for LS-BSR listed above.

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after

python /home/software/rhel6/med/python-libs/ls-bsr/1.0/LS-BSR-master/ls_bsr.py -d Abau_genomes/ -u /home/software/rhel6/sph/usearch/7.0.1001/bin/usearch7.0.1001_i86linux32
```

Run the custom perl script transfer_annotations.pl to add annotations to your BSR matrix. The output of this script will be bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt

```
perl transfer_annotations.pl Abau_ECII_PC.fasta Abau_ECII_PC.NR.annot bsr_matrix_values.txt consensus.fasta
```

>ii. Read matrix into R and create heatmap

Use sftp to get LS-BSR output onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is) 
mkdir LS-BSR_pan_genome 
cd LS-BSR_pan_genome 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after get bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt
```

Fire up RStudio and read the matrix in

```
bsr_mat_PG = read.table('bsr_matrix_values_annot.txt', sep = "\t", row.names = 1, header = TRUE, quote = "")
```

Use head, str, dim, etc. to explore the matrix you read in
Make a heatmap for the full matrix

```
heatmap3(as.matrix(bsr_mat_PG), , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

Make a heatmap for variable genes (present in at least one, but not all of the genomes

```
bsr_mat_PG_subset = bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) > 0 & rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) < 4 ,] heatmap3(as.matrix(bsr_mat_PG_subset), , scale = "none", distfun = function(x){dist(x, method = "manhattan")}, margin = c(10,10), cexCol = 0.85, cexRow = 0.5)
```

>iii. Which genomes are most closely related based upon shared gene content?

We will use the outer function to determine the number of genes shared by each pair of genomes. 
Here we are arbitrarily deciding that a gene is present if the BSR is greater than 0.4. 
Look at the help page for outer to gain additional insight into how this is working.

```
outer(1:4,1:4, FUN = Vectorize(function(x,y){sum(bsr_mat_PG_subset[,x] > 0.4 & bsr_mat_PG_subset[,y] > 0.4)}))
```

>iv. What is the size of the core genome?

Lets first get an overview of how many genes are present in different numbers of genomes (0, 1, 2, 3 or 4) by plotting a histogram. Here, we combine hist with rowSums to accomplish this.

```
hist(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4))
```

Next, lets figure out how big the core genome is (e.g. how many genes are common to all of our genomes)?

```
sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4)
```

>v. What is the size of the accessory genome?

Lets use a similar approach to determine the size of the accessory genome (e.g. those genes present in only a subset of our genomes).

```
sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) < 4 & rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) > 0)
```

>vi. What types of genes are unique to a given genome?

So far we have quantified the core and accessory genome, now lets see if we can get an idea of what types of genes are core vs. accessory. Lets start by looking at those genes present in only a single genome. What do you notice about these genes?

```
row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1,])
```

vii. What is the number of hypothetical genes in core vs. accessory genome?

Looking at unqiue genes we see that many are annotated as “hypothetical”, indicating that the sequence looks like a gene, but has no detectable homology with a functionally characterized gene. Determine the fraction of “hypothetical” genes in unique vs. core. Why does this make sense?

```
sum(grepl("hypothetical" , row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1,]))) / sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 1)

sum(grepl("hypothetical" , row.names(bsr_mat_PG[rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4,]))) / sum(rowSums(bsr_mat_PG > 0.4) == 4)
```

## Perform genome comparisons with [ACT](http://www.sanger.ac.uk/science/tools/artemis-comparison-tool-act)
[[back to top]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/day2_afternoon/README.md)
[[HOME]](https://github.com/alipirani88/Comparative_Genomics/blob/master/README.md)

In the previous exercises we were focusing on gene content, but losing the context of the structural variation underlying gene content variation (e.g. large insertions and deletions). 
Here we will use ACT to compare two of our genomes (note that you can use ACT to compare more than two genomes if desired). 

i. Create ACT alignment file with BLAST

As we saw this morning, to compare genomes in ACT we need to use BLAST to create the alignments. We will do this on flux.

```
cd scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after
blastall -p blastn -i ../Abau_genomes/AbauA_genome.fasta -d ../Abau_BLAST_DB/ACICU_genome.fasta -m 8 -e 1e-20 -o AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast
```

>ii. Read in genomes, alignments and annotation files

Use sftp to get ACT files onto your laptop

```
cd ~/Desktop (or wherever your desktop is)
mkdir Abau_ACT cd Abau_ACT 
sftp –r username@flux-login.engin.umich.edu 
cd /scratch/micro612w16_fluxod/username/day2_after get Abau_genomes/AbauA_genome.fasta get Abau_genomes/ACICU_genome.fasta 
get AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast 
get Abau_ACT_files/AbauA_genome_gene.gff 
get Abau_ACT_files/ACICU_genome_gene.gff
```

>iii. Explore genome comparison and features of ACT

Read in genomes and alignment into ACT

```
Go to File -> open 
Sequence file 1  = ACICU_genome.fasta 
Comparison file 1  = AbauA_vs_ACICU.blast
Sequence file 2  = AbauA_genome.fasta
```

Before we use annotation present in genbank files. Here we will use ACT specific annotation files so we get some prettier display (resistance genes = red, transposable elements = bright green)  

```
Go to File -> ACICU_genome.fasta -> Read an entry file = ACICU_genome_gene.gff

Go to File -> AbauA_genome.fasta -> Read an entry file = AbauA_genome_gene.gff
```

Play around in ACT to gain some insight into the sorts of genes present in large insertion/deletion regions. 
See if you can find: 
1) differences in phage content, 
2) membrane biosynthetic gene cluster variation and 
3) antibiotic resistance island variation.
